Hello, hello hello, and welcome
to English Learning for Curious
Minds, by Leonardo English.
The show where you can listen to
fascinating stories, and learn weird
and wonderful things about the world at
the same time as improving your English.
I'm Alastair Budge, and today we are
going to be talking about Norse Mythology.
When you think of mythology,
perhaps you think of the Romans
or Greeks, their stories of gods
and goddesses and epic battles.
But there was another European
civilisation to the icy north,
another civilisation with its unique
set of stories and myths that are
equally, if not more fascinating.
So, in today’s episode we’ll come
across stories of revenge, of mythical
beasts, of love and of betrayal.
We’ll start with an explanation of
some of the key figures in Norse
mythology before moving on to look
at the impact that it has had on
language and culture more widely.
We’ve got a lot to get through,
so let’s get right into it.
You might already know a
lot about Norse mythology.
You might know nothing about it.
Even if you are in that second category,
and you think you know nothing about
it, and have never encountered any links
with Norse mythology, then let me start
by reminding you that the signs of Norse
mythology are everywhere around us.
If you’ve met anyone named Freya,
you’ve ever done anything on a Tuesday,
Wednesday, Thursday or Friday, or
you are listening to this episode
on Bluetooth headphones, all of
these have links in Norse Mythology.
So, before looking at its impact on
our lives today, let’s take a look
at who these Norse gods actually
were, what they did, and why.
Our story begins in Scandinavia, a
huge, snowy area in Northern Europe
which includes the modern countries
of Sweden, Norway and Denmark.
Importantly, Scandinavia doesn’t include
Finland, which is a common misconception.
Nowadays, these countries are
famous for many things, a strong
welfare system, a successful fishing
industry, Spotify, the invention of
Minecraft, and flat-pack furniture.
But a thousand years ago, Scandinavia
was clearly a very different place.
Back then, the countries of Sweden,
Norway and Denmark were home to a
fierce race of people: the Vikings.
Now, the history books don’t look
particularly kindly on the vikings,
they don’t have a great reputation.
There’s a very good reason
for this, of course.
From the 9th century to the 11th
century, they attacked countries
all over Europe, burning down towns,
stealing anything of value and
killing anyone who got in their way.
As a quick side note - we do have
an episode just on the vikings,
so if you would like to listen to
that one, it’s episode number 96.
But aside from raping and pillaging, and
frightening the life out of anyone living
near the coast of Britain or Northern
France, the Vikings were actually a
highly cultured and developed people.
They were brilliant sailors, who
may have travelled to America
long before Christopher Columbus.
They made beautiful jewellery
and complicated wooden carvings.
Alongside this, they also had a vibrant
set of religious beliefs, which was
known at the time as “the Tradition”,
and is what we’ll be focussing on today.
Now, the Tradition was a
polytheistic religion, meaning
that it had lots of different gods.
The most powerful of these gods was Odin,
the god of wisdom, magic and poetry.
He was an old man with a beard, who
was blind in one eye, rode a horse with
eight legs, and had two pet ravens who
perched, who sat, on either shoulder.
Odin’s wife was a goddess named Frigg.
Just like him, she was very wise, and she
even had the power to see into the future.
Odin and Frigg had several children.
One of these children was
Thor, the god of thunder.
He was brave and strong, with
a magical hammer which returned
to his hand after he threw it.
And their other child was Balder.
He was known as the most beautiful of
all the gods, so pure and perfect that
he couldn’t be damaged by anything.
Well, there was one thing, but
we’ll get to that in a minute.
Then there was Loki, the god of
chaos and trickery, a naughty god who
wasn’t so keen on following the rules.
Sometimes, he acted as an ally, a
friend, to the other gods, helping
them to come up with clever plans.
At other times, he tricked the other gods.
The most famous of Loki’s tricks, if
you can really call it a trick, was the
murder of Balder, who remember, was Odin
and Frigg’s perfect son, the one who
couldn’t be damaged or hurt by anything.
Anything, that is, except for a
piece of mistletoe, a poisonous
plant with white berries, the one
people kiss under at Christmas time.
When Loki learned about Balder’s weakness,
he tricked one of the other gods into
throwing a piece of mistletoe at Balder.
Balder was killed, and when Odin
found out what had happened, he
was furious, and set out to punish
Loki in the most terrible way.
According to the stories, Loki was
tied to a rock and dropped into a
cave, where a venomous snake would drip
poison on his face for all eternity.
There were plenty of other gods as well.
Hel, the goddess of death,
who only had half a face.
Tyr, the god of warriors, whose
hand was bitten off by a giant wolf.
Freya, the goddess of love and beauty,
who rode a chariot pulled by cats.
Nobody knows for certain how many gods
there were altogether, but some historians
think there were almost a hundred.
Certainly too many for me to talk about
here, but I hope this has been a useful
overview of some of the main characters.
Perhaps you can already see some
similarities in gods in other
mythological stories, or some more
modern characters who bear a striking
resemblance to these ancient, Norse, gods.
So, how about where they actually lived?
The Greek and Roman Gods famously
lived on Mount Olympus, which is,
in fact, a real mountain - it’s
the highest mountain in Greece.
In Norse mythology, the Gods lived
in a different world altogether.
It was called Asgard, and it
was a beautiful place full of
extravagant palaces where the
gods would spend their time.
Alongside Asgard, there
were eight other worlds.
One of these worlds was Midgard,
the home of human beings, the
world that you and I live in.
And the world the Vikings
lived in, of course.
Another world was called Jotunheim, and
it was home to evil, powerful giants.
As well as Asgard, Midgard and
Jotunheim, the vikings also believed
in a place called Alfheim, which
was a world full of elves, and
Nidavellir, a world full of dwarves.
Now, perhaps you think this all
sounds wonderful and you have decided
that you are going to convert and
become a believer in Norse mythology.
Perhaps you think it
sounds somewhat strange.
Interesting, but not
particularly believable.
In any case, there are only a few thousand
people in the entire world today who still
worship the Norse gods, or believe in the
theory of the Nine Worlds, as it's called.
It’s no longer a popular religion
by any means, so what went wrong?
Well, for this we have to thank,
or blame perhaps, Christianity.
As the Vikings started to raid Britain,
they came into contact with Christianity,
which was the dominant religion in Britain
by the time of the Vikings’ arrival.
Historians believe that there are
several possible reasons that the
Vikings embraced Christianity so quickly.
Perhaps it could have been to do with
the fact that the Christian ideals
of love and acceptance, of going to
heaven and not having to constantly
fight people in bloody battles, that
this was alluring, it was attractive.
Perhaps it was due to the fact that the
Vikings wanted to assimilate, to blend
in, with the native, Christian population.
Perhaps it was after pressure
from Germans to the south.
Perhaps it was because they already
had a hundred or so gods, and they
figured that adding another one to
believe in wouldn’t be such a big deal.
Whatever the true reason, or whatever
the mix of reasons, relatively soon
after the Viking raids started,
the Vikings increasingly started
to worship a blend, a mixture, of
Christianity and Norse Mythology.
Even when the first Christian churches
were built in Scandinavia, there were
often Norse gods and creatures carved
into the wood alongside the pictures of
Jesus and the cross, and archaeologists
have also found gravestones with
the cross of Jesus on one half, and
the hammer of Thor on the other.
And with time, Norse mythology
eventually faded away almost entirely,
with Christianity taking its place.
By the fourteenth century, Jesus was
the dominant force in Scandinavia, and
the viking gods never really recovered.
This being said, while belief
in Norse gods has now all but
disappeared, their legacy and
influence is everywhere we look.
The English language, for example, is
dotted with references to Norse gods.
The days of the week are the
most obvious example of this.
“ Tuesday” is named after Tyr, the
god of warriors, the one whose hand
was bitten off by a giant wolf.
It literally means the Day of Tyr.
And it isn’t the only example.
“Wednesday” is named after Odin,
who was also known as Wodin.
“Thursday”, of course,
is named after Thor.
And finally we have
Friday, named after Frigg.
The other days of the week, as you
may know, have different origins:
“Monday” is named after the moon,
“Sunday” is named after the sun, and
“Saturday” is named after Saturn.
But the Norse gods still gave their names
to more than half of the English days
of the week, which is pretty impressive
for a belief system that all but died
out in Britain over 1,000 years ago.
And it’s not the only
influence on English.
We can see the influence of Norse
mythology in English place names too.
In Britain, there are 39 places
which are named after Odin, or Wodin.
Places like Wanstead, Wanston and
Wambrook are all references to the
old Norse god, even though if you went
and asked someone on the street there,
I imagine most wouldn’t realise it.
And what about the names of people?
Well, unless you live in
Scandinavia, you probably don’t
know anyone called Odin or Thor.
But do you know anyone called Freya?
The goddess with a chariot pulled by cats?
For the past few years, “Freya”
has been one of the top twenty
baby names for girls in England.
I know plenty of Freyas, and it’s
becoming more and more popular in
non-English speaking countries too.
And these are just a few of the
references to Norse mythology
in the English language.
Most people don’t even realise they’re
doing it, but there’s a good chance that
an English speaker unwittingly mentions
a Norse god at least once every day.
We can also see its influence
very strongly in stories.
This ancient religion has inspired
some of the most successful
books and films ever made.
If you look at a list of the
bestselling books of all time,
you’ll find JRR Tolkein’s The
Lord of the Rings at number three.
It has sold over 150 million copies
since it was published in 1954.
Perhaps you bought one of them,
and if you didn't, you may well
have watched the films instead.
If you know the story, either by reading
the book or watching the films, you
may well have noticed some similarities
between the characters in Tolkein’s books
and some of the gods I described earlier.
Tolkein was incredibly
interested in Norse mythology.
He started a group called The
Viking Club, where he would study
Norse mythology with his friends.
And these Norse influences
are everywhere in his writing.
Remember, in Norse mythology there
are different races: gods, humans,
giants, elves, trolls and dwarves.
In Norse mythology, the dwarves lived
in mountains and deep underground.
They were famous for their
mining and metalwork.
In Norse mythology, the elves had
magical powers and supernatural beauty.
In Norse mythology, there was Odin,
the wise old man with the beard.
If you have read any Tolkein, and you know
the story of Lord of the Rings, you will
be able to clearly see the links between
Tolkein’s world and the real, or at
least believed, world of Norse mythology.
And this is also true for
hundreds of other books.
Norse mythology’s magical races
have inspired so many authors,
including another of the best-selling
writers of all time, one that
came a little later: JK Rowling.
If you’ve read Harry Potter, or
you've seen the movies, you’ll
remember that there are elves
and giants, and a wise old man.
Rowling even named one of her characters,
an evil werewolf, Fenrir Greyback.
If you think back to the wolf I mentioned
earlier, the one who bit off Tyr’s hand.
That wolf was also called Fenrir.
So, these influences are everywhere
if you look carefully enough.
And in some cases, you don’t even
have to look carefully at all.
If you are a fan of Marvel,
you’ll know that two of the main
characters are Thor and Loki.
Just like the Thor in Norse mythology,
the Thor in the Marvel movies is the god
of thunder, with a magical hammer which
returns to his hand after he throws it.
His father is Odin, his mother is Frigg,
and he comes from a world called Asgard.
And as for Loki, he’s the son of a
giant, who sometimes works on Thor’s
side, and at other times betrays him.
It’s pretty much the same story,
with a 21st century twist!
And now, before we finish, we just
have time for another interesting
fact about the impact of the
vikings on the modern world.
And this is a legacy that you may well
be using at this very moment, if you are
listening to this with headphones without
wires, on AirPods or something like that.
I’m talking about Bluetooth,
the wireless technology.
Bluetooth was named after a
Viking king, Harald Bluetooth.
He was the King of Denmark at the end
of the 10th century, and he wasn’t
particularly good at brushing his teeth.
One tooth got so rotten
that it turned blue.
That’s where this nickname comes from.
So, why name this technology after
this dentist-hating Danish king?
Well, Harald Bluetooth was famous
for connecting Denmark and Norway
into one kingdom, just like Bluetooth
technology connects phones to computers
or headphones or things like that.
If you are listening to this episode via
Bluetooth, or you have a Bluetooth-enabled
phone or computer nearby, take a
look at the Bluetooth logo now.
It looks a bit like two triangles
with lines sticking out of the
left, or maybe you think it
looks a bit like the letter “B”.
The Bluetooth logo is actually a
pair of viking runes, or Old Norse
symbols - Hagall and Bjarkan.
H and B, if you were to
convert them to English.
These letters were Harald Bluetooth’s
initials, his initials now forever
embedded on a technology used by billions
of people around the world every day.
So, next time you turn on your Bluetooth,
you meet a lady called Freya, or you need
to arrange anything for a weekday except
Monday, just remember that the remnants of
Norse mythology are everywhere around us.
And if this story has really
captured you, I’m glad to hear it.
Maybe even next Wednesday, or
Wodin’s Day, you’ll decide to spare a
thought for that wise, one-eyed god,
Wodin, and his eight-legged horse.
Ok then, that is it for today's
episode on Norse mythology.
Now that you know what you’re looking
for, hopefully you’ll be able to spot the
influence of the vikings and their ancient
gods in all kinds of unexpected places.
As always, I would love to know
what you thought about this episode.
Which one of the Norse gods did
you find the most interesting?
Can you think of any other
books or films which have been
influenced by Norse mythology?
How do you think the vikings would feel
to know the impact that their religion
and culture has on the modern world?
I would love to know, so let’s
get this discussion started.
You can head right into our
community forum, which is at
community.leonardoenglish.com, and get
chatting away to other curious minds.
You've been listening to English Learning
for Curious Minds, by Leonardo English.
I'm Alastair Budge, you stay safe, and
I'll catch you in the next episode.